I think one concept since we have new
people so I'm gonna start talking a
little bit about the ego so feral cat
was talking a lot about this and I think
it was sort of tricky because gamers
have a really tricky relationship with
ego so I'd like to explain a little bit
about
Oh sort of my understanding of ego and
I'm gonna use some Sun script phrases so
apologies if this gets a little bit hard
to access
so in sanskrit the ego is something
called the Omkar so a hum car is really
more closely translated as the
eye-feeling
so it's sort of when I think about Who I
am I think of the that's a hum gar so I
can describe myself as a man I can
describe myself as Indian I can describe
myself is is a physician I can describe
myself as faculty at Harvard Medical
School I can describe myself as a
husband as a parent so those are all
things that are my ahum card that's not
really who I know it's not the true self
it's actually the false self so when I
but the the problem is that we tend to
think that this is who we are so we I
think about a hum car is anything that
you can put on a resume right I can read
a resume that tells me like kind of who
you like they tells me about you but the
resume doesn't actually tell me who you
are and so a hunk are we it's tricky
because when we think about things like
so feral cat was talking about how for a
while she was very concerned about you
know the the streamer count I started
the viewer count on her stream so when
she started streaming she just streamed
for fun but at some point her identity
her ego got caught up in who she is like
sorry who's on the viewer account so
like her value as a human being started
to get tied into how many subs she has
how many viewers she has so that's all
ego so the tricky thing is that a lot of
gamers have trouble with ego because the
ego of the Omkar arises as a protective
mechanism so I'm gonna give you guys an
example so let's say that I'm let's say
that like my first job like I was
serving ice cream and so I worked at
like an ice cream shop and there was a
that let's say that there's a there's a
cute girl who's like I'm 16 years old
you know I'm working at the ice cream
shop I have a co-worker who's 16 and
she's cute too and I get up the courage
to ask her out and she says No
and then a weird thought goes through my
head I'm like talking to my friends
about it afterward and I'm like oh yeah
like you know I really wasn't that into
her anyway like she's not even that
attractive you know I just thought you
know it's like it's really like I'm
really not that into her does that make
sense to you guys is that like can you
guys see how someone would think that
but the funny thing is that that's like
completely false right like if I wasn't
into her and I didn't find her
attractive I wouldn't have asked her out
in the first place so like what's going
on in your mind there what's going on is
the hum car is activating so let's think
through what's actually going on in that
person's head so when I ask someone out
and they say no I feel some kind of
negative emotion right I feel shame I
feel like oh man like I feel shame and
like I start to have these really really
scary thoughts and the scary thoughts
that I have like I don't really
consciously think these but they're like
really buried beneath the surface I I
start to think like is anyone ever gonna
say yes cuz like you're 16 and you don't
have confidence and you start to feel
shame and stuff like that but you bury
it real deep you express a little bit of
frustration you're like aw man like
that's that's annoying
and then what happens is the hum car
steps in because I want you guys to
understand your ego is actually a
protective mechanism it's like the
bouncer for your mind and anytime you
feel negative emotion the ego is gonna
step in and it's gonna try to protect
you
so my ego steps in that says hey man
like you didn't really like her that
much did you like she's not even that
attractive like you nothing to worry
about you don't have to feel shame you
don't have to feel any of those negative
things because you're not really that
into her so then what happens is like
your ego activates so ego is a very
protective mechanism and then the other
thing that the ego does is it starts to
like it builds up your identity right it
builds up all these false things about
you it's like oh man you're awesome like
your friends really like you
yeah so nice guys is a classic that's
beautiful so nice guys is all a hunk are
right these people have this image of
themselves and the image of themself is
like like has this sort of positive
shell for like a lot of negativity
underneath which is exactly how the
Omkar works because the hum car doesn't
need to be around unless you're
experiencing negative emotion so yeah if
you guys want to talk about nice guys we
can do that and but anyway yeah
[Music]
hmm the masks we wear is that a man to
be accepted in certain situations is
that a manifestation of ego I'd say yes
so I'd say so let's remember that
acceptance let's just think about that
question so what he's asking is
acceptance is valuing another person's
opinion so if you were bending yourself
over backwards for another person's
opinion chances are your ego is involved
another thing that we talked a lot about
with feral cat was like this sense of
authenticity she was stumbling through
this phase where she started streaming
and did it because she thought it was
fun and then what happened is like
something magical happened in her head
and what happened in her head is she
started like not having fun streaming
but felt like tied to doing it like when
I was listening to her it almost sounded
like she was like chained to a ball and
like the ball was like someone tossed
the ball in the water and she's like
struggling to swim and she started
getting like caught up in like
viewership and partnerships and subs and
all that good stuff
and so she started putting on a mask for
other people like for their approval and
that's absolutely what the ego is
because then her identity becomes as a
successful or unsuccessful streamer
right that's how she and then her value
of herself as a human being is
determined by the number of viewers she
has so that's that's exactly how ego
works and so the tricky thing is that
like how do you get around that you
start just like living for the sake of
like doing what you're doing right you
don't worry about what other people are
thinking that's difficult but you start
sort of living in kind of like living in
the moment because the other thing about
the ego in opinions is they're all sort
of future oriented so if you think about
like you're trying to win someone over
you're not trying to win them over in
the present you're trying to win them
over in the future like if I go to a
party and I put on a mask like why am i
putting on the mask it's because I want
to be invited to the next one
so the tricky thing is that as long as
you're thinking about the future you're
gonna be like wrapped up in all this
crap one really simple way to move away
from ego is to like live in the present
so if I think about my resume like my
resume is like all about the past and I
think about expectations in the future
but if I want to step away from ego like
look at a sunset right like watch a
sunset or actually this is a really good
one you guys want an interesting
meditative exercise ask yourself the
next time you take a dump ask yourself
who's taking the dump
right like are you a man or a woman like
are you a student or you do you have a
net worth when you're taking a dump like
does any of that even matter nope you're
just someone taking a dump when I'm
taking a dump I'm no different from
anyone else like it doesn't matter that
I'm a doctor or not it doesn't matter
that I'm a man it doesn't matter that
I'm a parent I'm just a guy take exactly
you're just a human and the truth is
that anytime you do something in the
present that's all you are when you're
looking at a sunset it doesn't matter
who's looking at the sunset
once again you're not a man or a woman
you're just someone who's looking at the
sunset
yeah I mean you got to watch out
constipation is a dangerous thing you
guys you know you're joking about that
but like you guys ever heard of a manual
disimpaction you guys know what that is
not funny dude
seriously like I've worked with people
who are suicidal from not being able to
take it dumb like it's bad yeah it's
like so I was working with this woman
who was like 70 something and had like
cancer like stage four cancer and one
day I asked her like what's the worst
part of your life and she's like it's
the constipation like she was on pain
medications and it's just like it's the
worst feeling like it's just awful
but it looked like we had another
question okay
it can be right so the question is how
do you view it right it so I'd put it
another way like so is your job your ego
for some people the answer is absolutely
yes and for some people the answers
absolutely no so for some people their
job is just a job and for some people
it's their identity so I work with a lot
of like executives like like CEOs and
things like that and for a lot of these
people it's like it's really tough like
I'm working with someone right now who
recently kind of got into a problem with
like board members and and other people
in this company so he's out and and this
is a company that he had been a huge
part of had built like from tiny to big
and so like that's who he was because
like that's what he did like that his
his entire he had sacrificed so much of
his life like all of his best years of
his life to become this thing in this
company and then someone took it away
from him and when they took it away from
him like who is he then he's like he
feels like a no one and so we're working
to start to discover okay like who are
you really
I think the beautiful thing about his
Karma his Karma is that he's given he's
been given like an amazing opportunity
to discover who he is because if he had
not left that company he would just be a
bored of that train and would be
chugging along and then like ten years
later he would have a midlife crisis
and that's what yeah so like all these
crises that people experience it's
because you build up this identity of
who you are and then if something
attacks that external thing you as a
human being your identity gets attacked
but if all I am is a dude who's taking a
dump like no one can take that away from
me well I mean I guess you could be
constipated but like I'm watching a
sunset if I'm just like if I'm existing
in the moment and I'm just doing what
I'm doing like even if it's playing a
video game or like eating a piece of
food or studying for a test in that
moment if all I'm doing is that thing
and I don't care about Who I am then
it's not ego so right now I'm streaming
and so is this a part of my identity
like not really I'm just like I just get
up here and like basically what I do in
my life is I talk at people so sometimes
you know I'm a therapist and so like
someone comes to my to office and like I
talk at them slash to them sometimes I
run a workshop or I give lectures and so
I just like I show up and I just sort of
say things now you know is this a part
of my ego not yet but if I'm not careful
the same thing is gonna happen to me
right so right now I see that I have 45
viewers if I'm not I'm not you know if
I'm not careful like that number is
gonna start meaning something to me
because I'm not any better or worse than
feral cat or anyone else who streams
there are parts of my brain that value
that thing because that's the way my
brain is wired there are parts of our
brain that developed when we're in
puberty that start to like really care
about the opinions of others and the
reason that happens in puberty so if you
think about like why high school is such
a tough time there's a really
fascinating cognitive thing that happens
in high school which is that your brain
develops the capacity to understand that
people have sustained nuanced opinions
of yourself so like if you talk to a
nine year old they have this idea that
you know someone likes me or doesn't
like me when you're 15 you start to
realize that people have sustained
opinions about you that are like
complicated
and why does that happen in in high
school it's because like when as we
start to develop like as we go through
puberty we prepared a mate and a big
part of mating is actually like social
circuitry and our standing within a
society so those are linked like the
developmental kind of the development of
ego and that happens when you're a
teenager and sexual development are
linked in those parts of my brain are
active too so as is streamers start to
like as they start to develop a value of
themselves as a human being based on the
amount of like viewers they have that's
absolutely ego the other thing though is
that there may be strong some streamers
out there I don't really know who
understand that they have inherent value
as a person and so they don't need to
get that value from the external world
right and if we circle but once once
again back to feral cat we were talking
about her how her mom her mom cares what
other people think and a lot of the
grief that happens between feral cat and
her mom is because feral cat is
concerned about how I mean sorry feral
cats mom is concerned about how things
are going to look right so if there are
people who are concerned about how
things are gonna look that's all ego so
you can stream and you can sort of live
your life and you can try to make a good
product I mean I'm sure there's a lot of
you know calculation that goes into
successful stream in terms of like
timing and advertising and like widgets
and things like that but it doesn't have
to be ego but I would guess for most of
the people it is and the main reason for
that is because most streamers are young
right so most people like you know they
find themselves like in their 40s or
they have a midlife crisis if they
haven't found themselves but it takes
time to develop confidence in who you
are as a person and I think that if you
start streaming early you really have to
be careful about you have to start doing
additional things to help yourself
develop a healthy identity for yourself
that's sort of separate from your ego if
you guys are curious we can talk about
that
Oh
not really it's a little bit tricky to
this experience of ADHD
rejection manifestation is for
so I don't know what that is is a
clinical term but I have a lot of
experience with ADHD
Payne Emily you will perceive negative
situation in situation yeah so that I
understand so but yeah so I mean it sort
of makes sense to me so let's so let's
talk a little bit about ADHD in
rejection sensitivity dysphoria so
rejection sensitivity dysphoria I mean
I'm not familiar with it sort of in a
clinical technical term but it you know
I understand the psychology behind it
like is essentially you know when
someone perceives a lot of negative
things and suffers a lot from either
rejections or perceived rejections so I
think this has to do a lot with
yeah so so I mean it makes a lot of
sense to me too I wasn't sure if there
was like a particular definition of it
that I was unfamiliar with so this makes
a lot of sense to me so I think this
goes back to some ideas behind like
cognitive bias and actually senses of
identity so when we approach like this
kind of mental stuff I actually think
Eastern perspectives are better than
Western perspectives so sometimes what
happens is human beings have this really
crazy thing where they're like if they
believe something about themselves they
have this kind of cognitive bias to sort
of like prove it to be true so for
example I'll give you guys just an
example of someone that I used to work
with was afraid that their partner was
gonna break up with them they were like
terrified that their partner was gonna
break up with them and so they would
actually like do things to like push
their partner to break up with them and
they would like drive their partner
crazy and and it was kind of weird but
they'd say like oh absolutely I
self-fulfilling prophecies they're like
bit like you know the person would come
home and then be like yeah you're gonna
break up with me aren't you and then
like if you're the partner in that
situation like what are you gonna say
you're like no I'm I'm not gonna break
up with you but then the person is like
no I like your you're gonna you're gonna
break up with me like I just I know it
like I'm gonna do something and like and
then the partner gets frustrated and so
then this person like then sees the
frustration and then they start to think
it's true they're like oh it's happening
right now right you're mad at me now and
now you're gonna break up with me
because now you're mad and then the the
the more like I insist that this person
is going to break up with me the more
frustrated that they get and the more
that like I feel like this is actually
happening and so it becomes kind of a
self-fulfilling prophecy
and so this is a problem because the
mind has this bias for like the kind of
information that it interprets
and so when it comes to rejection
sensitivity this is a problem
essentially of confidence so there's a
weird thing that happens to their ahum
car where they believe that they are
like not like worthwhile human beings
and so what happens is that there's a
there's actually like there's there
studies that should sort of show this
negative cognitive bias like Studies on
depression where if you know if I have a
low opinion of myself and then like I
walk into let's say I enter a
conversation where I get 50% compliments
and 50% insults like what's gonna happen
is I'm gonna prioritize
the insults over the compliments and the
other crazy thing that happens is if you
really have low self-confidence what do
you think happens when someone
compliments you what do you say in
response
you
absolutely right
you you don't you don't accept it yeah
so now now just think about that for a
second right like so imagine that you
have a brain that is being presented
with positive data but then you just
discount the data right like you just
throw it out and then what happens isn't
when there's negative data like that
we're gonna accept like that's a
legitimate that's a legitimate judgment
do you think I'm a [ __ ] I can get
behind that
but if you think I'm a good person no no
no you're wrong right and so then what
happens is it reinforces your settle
your lack of confidence because all of
the positive information that you're
receiving actually gets thrown out the
window
and then then what happens is like it
only reinforces it so then you kind of
get into this vicious cycle that you
kind of can't get out of because if
people are trying to help you if they're
trying to reassure you like let's say
once again you know I'm convinced that
my partner is gonna break up with me my
partner can be doing everything that
they can to reassure me and it's just
not sinking it and so the reason for
that is because the lack of self
confidence actually comes from somewhere
else and so that needs to be addressed
with directly and once you start to
address it directly then you can start
to conquer rejection sensitivity
syndrome
because rejection sensitivity syndrome
has nothing to do with being rejected it
actually has everything to do with your
belief that the only thing that's
appropriate is rejection you just won't
accept anything else so you have to
learn how to like develop confidence in
yourself as a person
and then like move from there so I think
we have other questions and comments so
let me just think for a second
another question yeah what this is
what if you feel like you were very
confident you still handle compliments
yeah then then you're not a confident
person right so that meant that's where
you feel like you're confident but it's
like let's just think about it so sorry
the question was you know what if what
if you're a confident what if you feel
like you're a confident person but you
handle compliments and insults the same
way and I'm assuming the same way means
that you knock down
compliments and you accept insults then
I'd say that in your core of self you're
not confident because if you were truly
confident in yourself you could be
unbiased with the way that you receive
things and so you may have an impression
of being confident or that you may be
confident in some areas because
confidence is not like a monolith right
it's not like one quality you can be
confident in your appearance versus in
your ability to like play dota or
overwatch or Fortnight versus your
ability to like be financially
independent so confidence has a lot of
different dimensions what I guess is
that either you have learned how to act
confident in a particular way or that
you're confident in a particular
environment but that there's a
particular some part of you that doesn't
feel confident in who you are and so you
just have to tunnel down and try to
figure out okay what is it that I'm
confident in myself about and like why
is it that I can't accept a compliment
like what about that feels wrong to me
when someone you know looks at me and
says like oh yeah like you know you're a
very attractive person like what why do
I feel like I'm not attractive you know
why can't I sit with what they're saying
and just accept it for what it is where
did I get the idea that I am NOT the way
that this person is thinking I am
Oh God so body dysmorphia for
bodybuilders is one of the most
difficult things to treat in psychiatry
so I don't know if this really answers
your question but so when we talk about
generally speaking like psychiatric
illness and I even then I mean I don't
really like the idea of psychiatric
illness because it's based on like a
Western medical model like by medical I
mean like physical medicine so
psychiatry followed along with like
cancer and disease in other ways but it
our minds aren't like that you know like
a heart attack is like a very real thing
whereas body dysmorphia is like sort of
a it's a description that we have for
someone's mind it's not necessarily like
an illness we call it an illness because
it causes people suffering but but
here's the the big thing to understand
about body dysmorphia and we're trying
to help people with psychological stuff
the first question is whether something
is ego-syntonic or ego-dystonic and this
is a different ego from what I was
talking about earlier this is like a
clinical term so ego-syntonic is
something that people like agree with
internally and ego-dystonic is something
that people like disagree with
internally so I'll give you guys an
example so a lot of people say that
their OCD because they like to keep
things clean that's very ego-syntonic
like they want things clean and if you
try to tell them to relax they're going
to fight you against it right versus
something that like true OCD is when
people recognize that they should stop
washing their hands after they've done
it for the ninth time in a row with
blistering hot water and excessive
amounts of bleach but they literally
cannot stop because they have a
compulsion that is so strong like their
hands are wrapped in bandages and they
take off the bandages and they'd like
mix soap with bleach and they rub them
because they feel unclean that is true
ego that that is oh that is true OCD and
that is very ego-dystonic the person is
doing it but they know that they don't
want to do it and they don't feel good
doing it versus someone who's a neat
freak is ego-syntonic which means they
don't think there's anything wrong with
their with what they're doing they're
convinced that what they're doing is the
right way to do it
so the tricky thing about body
dysmorphia
so there are two kinds of like people
who come in with like problems about
their appearance you know some people
like recognize that it's a problem and
they say like okay you know I know I'm
not like I feel unconfident in my
appearance but like I'm trying to work
on that and I don't want to feel that
way anymore the problem with the body
builders I've worked with is that they
don't start there they don't think they
have a problem at all they're just
convinced that it's factually true that
their body does not look good enough
it's not an issue in their psychology
they don't want to change they just
think it's like I just don't look good
enough and I need to train harder so
that I can look better and despite being
in the top one percentile of the
population in terms of like body fat or
like musculature or how much they can
benchpress they're just not unsatisfied
because their beliefs are actually
really ego-syntonic they don't see a
problem with what what's going on so I
mean I think I think it's tricky because
how do you convince someone so that then
we kind of get into denial right so like
how do you convince someone that they
have a problem that's a whole different
can of worms which is tricky
sure um could you comment on the wordage
of easy you're currently take talking
about confidence and I think part of it
is the concept of easy in instruction
and teaching I will often hear how are
you not confident in your abilities it's
easy I really dislike the concept of
easy so do I so I think that's stupid to
be honest so I mean know so I'm
confident right like you guys probably
get that impression but nowhere along
the way did I say that this was easy
like sure I you know I'm confident in
myself and I think you guys can be
successful if you're struggling but
nowhere to do I think it's easy I think
calling something easy is one of the the
most devaluing things that you can do
because let's just think about that for
a second if you say that how are you not
confident in your abilities it's easy
like if you think about it what you're
telling the person is that they're
incompetent right because you're like
how can you not do this it's so [ __ ]
easy like you're it the easier it is so
if something is super super easy and
they're not doing it that means that
they're super super idiotic right so I
think that like calling things easy is a
really really big mistake I don't think
that confidence is easy
and I think if someone else is calling
something that you're struggling with
easy they just really don't understand
or have not faced what you are facing
they just really have no idea so one
example is that you know so let's say
that like you have social anxiety and
then like a buddy of yours doesn't and
they're like I don't know I don't know
what the problem is why don't you just
go to a party and hang out man it's just
easy just like don't think about it like
just try to have a good time man like
they have no idea what you're what's at
they have never experienced in your mind
what what you are experiencing and so it
you know if someone says that like you
know how are you not confident in your
abilities it's easy like you have to
pause for a second the first thing is
that they probably don't understand what
you're actually going through and the
second thing is that you should really
think a little bit about you know why
why is it that this person perceives
such respect in my abilities and I do
not
so I think if you want to grow there
what you really have to do is grapple
with yourself why is it that everyone
else sees me as amazing and I don't like
where does that come from why is it hard
because it is hard because if it was
easy you'd be doing it like that's
stupid why is it hard for you to see
yourself that way
[Music]
ah no so this is a great question so
subtly no so people do all kinds of
destructive self-destructive [ __ ]
which is completely ego-syntonic all the
time and in fact I'd even say that the
more self-destructive it is the more
likely it is to be ego-syntonic so if we
think about self-destructive behavior
it's things that you do to yourself I'll
repeat the question
so eager to stock is ego-dystonic like
self-destructive behavior so what's the
relationship between being ego-dystonic
and and self-destructive so I would
actually say that most people who do and
by the way guys I really appreciate your
patience with like me learning the ropes
of this stuff I'm new to this and and
your feedback and stuff is awesome so
thank you for you know letting me know
when I'm doing something wrong and
please let me know if I need to be doing
something differently but just kind of
going back to ego-dystonic and
self-destructive behavior so if you
think about like really self-destructive
behavior most of the stuff that's
self-destructive people aren't really
aware of right like if you're thinking
about self sabotaging relationships or
like let's say that you you know you you
have a tendency to like date the wrong
kind of person so there's a lot of stuff
that I work with that's really
self-destructive and what I've actually
found is that self-destructive behaviors
ego-syntonic you don't recognize that
it's self-destructive in fact you think
what you're doing is exactly right even
though like your torpedoing some part of
your life does that make sense
yeah so like this is where it's it's not
it's not ego-dystonic at all like you
sure you suffer later but the thing
about ego-dystonic is that someone
doesn't want to be doing what they're
doing in the moment exactly so they
don't want to be doing what they want to
do in the moment and like it's someone
with true OCD can't help themselves they
have to wash their hands even though
they know that they shouldn't and that
they don't want to and so when it comes
to self-destructive behavior a lot of
that stuff is like ignoring red flags
it's like you know and you think that
you're doing everything right even
though you're doing everything wrong and
so that kind of self-reflection is
tricky and difficult
yeah so locking the door usually
repetitive behaviors okay well will do
like maybe one or two more questions and
then we'll wrap up for the day for or
will transition to like doing a little
bit of meditation and then I have one or
two closing thoughts because we've been
talking about a lot about confidence and
so I want to share just a little bit
about how to become confident
we have any other questions or should we
transition okay
I think we've gotten to most of
so I'm just gonna talk to you guys a
little bit so you know we're talking
about confidence we're talking about
it's hard so in my mind like talking
about this stuff really is not gonna
change y'all's lives right like you're I
mean so let me just tell you guys so a
simple way that I think you should you
can develop confidence is so we've
talked a lot about ego and go for it
we'll block we've talked a lot about ego
and we've talked a lot about you know
how streamers and other people in
general like how our identity starts to
be built up based on how others judge us
so I think one of the best things you
can do for your confidence is to do
something that know to challenge
yourself in a way that no one can judge
you in the simplest way to do that is to
do things in nature so what I would
recommend that you guys do is like like
go like to a national park or something
and like find a boulder like be safe but
I remember like there was a time when I
was I would just like go out in nature
and I would just like do stuff like I
would look at some point on a hill and I
would say to myself I'm gonna get to the
top of that hill or I would like look at
a boulder and I'd be like I'm gonna see
if I can climb that Boulder and
sometimes I would succeed and sometimes
I would fail but the cool thing about
nature is like nature doesn't give a
[ __ ] like nature doesn't care whether
you succeed or fail it doesn't care
about living up to expectations or not
living up up to expectations and when
you succeed the this is a tricky thing
about confidence because when you do
something in the real world like what's
just as damaging or insidious for your
confidence is the reward right if I get
if I become valedictorian of my high
school I'm screwed because my ego is
gonna like take a boost from that right
so whether you do good things whether
you get bullied in high school or you
get praised for how smart you are both
of them are gonna screw you over and
lead to ego and move you away from
confidence so the simple solution is to
spend time with nature because nature
doesn't care Nature doesn't care if
you're you're fat or skinny it doesn't
care if you're strong or you're weak
it doesn't care if you're smart or
you're stupid it doesn't care if you're
a good-looking or bad-looking and so
your brain needs time away from all of
those thoughts
so like go and like swim somewhere go
and climb something for a long time like
a big part of my personal growth was
like I would go mountain climbing so I
spent like you know time in Colorado
mountain climbing I spent time in like
climbed Kilimanjaro and and things like
that and it was it was like an awesome
experience like go and spend time with
nature because nature doesn't judge you
nature just it just doesn't and what you
really need to do to develop confidence
as being a judgment-free zone